README.md, before:

# Student Group Attribution Tool

A command-line tool to optimize student group formation and subject assignment based on ranked preferences.

## 🚀 How to Use

### 1. Installation
Requires Python 3.8+.
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone git@github.com:bonben/pml_attribution.git
cd pml_attribution

# Create a virtual environment (optional but recommended)
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Prepare Data
Create a CSV file (e.g., `students.csv`) with the required columns. 
The tool supports Google Forms export format with columns like:
- `Your email`
- `Rank your Top 5 Subject Preferences ... [Subject Name]`
- `Student 1` (Partner Choice 1)
- `Student 2` (Partner Choice 2)

See `example_input.csv` (if available) or the code for details.

### 3. Run the Solver
```bash
python attribution.py --input students.csv --output results.csv
```
This generates:
- `results.csv`: The final groups.
- `results_report.txt`: A detailed explanation of scores.

---

# 🎓 How Groups and Subjects are Assigned (Student Guide)

To ensure fairness, the group formation and subject attribution process is performed by an optimization algorithm (Constraint Satisfaction Solver). This avoids manual bias and maximizes the overall satisfaction of the entire class.

Here is exactly how the algorithm works:

## 1. Goal
The system tries to maximize a global "Satisfaction Score". It tests millions of combinations to find the one that gives the highest total score for everyone.

## 2. Priorities
The score is calculated based on three main criteria, in this order of importance:

### A. Group Size (Highest Priority)
- The algorithm aims for groups of **3 students**.
- **Groups of 4 are NOT allowed.**
- Groups of 2 are allowed if necessary (e.g., if there are 4 students, we make two groups of 2).

### B. Subject Preferences
We want your group to work on a topic you like.
- **1st Choice Subject**: +100 points.
- **2nd Choice Subject**: +80 points.
- **3rd Choice Subject**: +60 points.
- **4th Choice Subject**: +40 points.
- **5th Choice Subject**: +20 points.

*Note: The system considers the preferences of ALL group members. It will try to find a subject that is highly ranked by everyone in the group, rather than giving one person their top choice and others their last choice.*

### C. Partner Preferences (Optional)
You can indicate who you would like to work with **if you want**.
- **Partner Choice**: If you are placed in a group with someone you chose (whether 1st or 2nd choice), the system gets a bonus (+25 points).
- **Mutual Choices**: If you pick someone AND they pick you back, the points stack up.

## Summary
The algorithm looks for a solution that:
1.  Keeps group sizes correct (3 ideal).
2.  Maximizes the number of students paired with their preferred partners.
3.  Assigns subjects that the group members collectively ranked highest.

It is a mathematical guarantee that the result is the "best possible compromise" given everyone's constraints.

## 3. Technical Details (For the Curious)
The problem is modeled as a **Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CP)** and solved using Google's **OR-Tools (CP-SAT Solver)**.

### The Algorithm: CP-SAT
Unlike "heuristic" algorithms (like Genetic Algorithms or Simulated Annealing) which guess and improve, this approach is **exact and exhaustive**.

#### How it explores the solution space
The solver doesn't just randomly flip switches. It uses advanced mathematical techniques to navigate the billions of possible combinations efficiently:

1.  **Propagation (Deduction)**: 
    The solver looks at your constraints and "deduces" forced moves. 
    *Example: "If Alice is in Group 1, and Group 1 is full, then Bob cannot be in Group 1."*
    It cascades these logical deductions instantly, pruning massive chunks of the "search tree" that are impossible.

2.  **Branching and Backtracking**:
    When logic alone isn't enough, it makes a tentative decision (e.g., "Let's try putting Charlie in Group 2"). It then propagates the consequences.
    - If it hits a contradiction (e.g., "Oops, now Group 2 has 4 people"), it **backtracks** immediately, undoing that decision and marking it as invalid.
    - This intelligent trial-and-error allows it to explore the entire feasible mathematical space without checking every single option one by one.

#### Global Optimality
Because of this structured search, when the solver finishes and says "Optimal", it has **mathematically proven** that no better solution exists. It has implicitly checked or logically ruled out every other possibility.

Commit message:

Update README with Friendship Limit

README.md, after:

# Student Group Attribution Tool

A command-line tool to optimize student group formation and subject assignment based on ranked preferences.

## 🚀 How to Use

### 1. Installation
Requires Python 3.8+.
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone git@github.com:bonben/pml_attribution.git
cd pml_attribution

# Create a virtual environment (optional but recommended)
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Prepare Data
Create a CSV file (e.g., `students.csv`) with the required columns. 
The tool supports Google Forms export format with columns like:
- `Your email`
- `Rank your Top 5 Subject Preferences ... [Subject Name]`
- `Student 1` (Partner Choice 1)
- `Student 2` (Partner Choice 2)

See `example_input.csv` (if available) or the code for details.

### 3. Run the Solver
```bash
python attribution.py --input students.csv --output results.csv
```
This generates:
- `results.csv`: The final groups.
- `results_report.txt`: A detailed explanation of scores.

---

# 🎓 How Groups and Subjects are Assigned (Student Guide)

To ensure fairness, the group formation and subject attribution process is performed by an optimization algorithm (Constraint Satisfaction Solver). This avoids manual bias and maximizes the overall satisfaction of the entire class.

Here is exactly how the algorithm works:

## 1. Goal
The system tries to maximize a global "Satisfaction Score". It tests millions of combinations to find the one that gives the highest total score for everyone.

## 2. Priorities
The score is calculated based on three main criteria, in this order of importance:

### A. Group Size (Highest Priority)
- The algorithm aims for groups of **3 students**.
- **Groups of 4 are NOT allowed.**
- Groups of 2 are allowed if necessary (e.g., if there are 4 students, we make two groups of 2).

### B. Subject Preferences
We want your group to work on a topic you like.
- **1st Choice Subject**: +100 points.
- **2nd Choice Subject**: +80 points.
- **3rd Choice Subject**: +60 points.
- **4th Choice Subject**: +40 points.
- **5th Choice Subject**: +20 points.

*Note: The system considers the preferences of ALL group members. It will try to find a subject that is highly ranked by everyone in the group, rather than giving one person their top choice and others their last choice.*

### C. Partner Preferences (Optional)
You can indicate who you would like to work with **if you want**.
- **Partner Choice**: If you are placed in a group with someone you chose (whether 1st or 2nd choice), the system gets a bonus (+25 points).
- **Mutual Choices**: If you pick someone AND they pick you back, the points stack up.
- **Friendship Limit**: To ensure large friend groups do not unfairly "steal" subjects from others, there is a maximum limit on how much "friendship points" a single group can accumulate (80 points).

## Summary
The algorithm looks for a solution that:
1.  Keeps group sizes correct (3 ideal).
2.  Maximizes the number of students paired with their preferred partners.
3.  Assigns subjects that the group members collectively ranked highest.

It is a mathematical guarantee that the result is the "best possible compromise" given everyone's constraints.

## 3. Technical Details (For the Curious)
The problem is modeled as a **Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CP)** and solved using Google's **OR-Tools (CP-SAT Solver)**.

### The Algorithm: CP-SAT
Unlike "heuristic" algorithms (like Genetic Algorithms or Simulated Annealing) which guess and improve, this approach is **exact and exhaustive**.

#### How it explores the solution space
The solver doesn't just randomly flip switches. It uses advanced mathematical techniques to navigate the billions of possible combinations efficiently:

1.  **Propagation (Deduction)**: 
    The solver looks at your constraints and "deduces" forced moves. 
    *Example: "If Alice is in Group 1, and Group 1 is full, then Bob cannot be in Group 1."*
    It cascades these logical deductions instantly, pruning massive chunks of the "search tree" that are impossible.

2.  **Branching and Backtracking**:
    When logic alone isn't enough, it makes a tentative decision (e.g., "Let's try putting Charlie in Group 2"). It then propagates the consequences.
    - If it hits a contradiction (e.g., "Oops, now Group 2 has 4 people"), it **backtracks** immediately, undoing that decision and marking it as invalid.
    - This intelligent trial-and-error allows it to explore the entire feasible mathematical space without checking every single option one by one.

#### Global Optimality
Because of this structured search, when the solver finishes and says "Optimal", it has **mathematically proven** that no better solution exists. It has implicitly checked or logically ruled out every other possibility.
